all right well good evening everybody
this is my planetarium show for august
of 2020
and it's been produced using some
software called stellarium that you can
download from the internet
it's absolutely free and a wonderful way
of learning about the night sky
so i've switched over here to 9 30 p.m
and the sun is beginning to set
and what we're going to do is run time
forwards and we'll see the sun
sink down below the horizon and the sky
get darker sky color begins to change
the familiar oranges and reds of sunset
there it goes down behind the tree
behind the horizon
the sky is getting darker and as we get
to 9 30 p.m
we should just begin to see a few stars
starting to appear
so the first one we're going to look at
is very bright star called arcturus it's
in the constellation of bhutes the
herdsman
one that you may not be familiar with
but very prominent
in the uh evening sky and it's a red
giant star it's a little bit like the
sun will be
in seven billion years time
when it's run out of fuel and expanded
now we're going to look down towards the
south and get our last chance to catch
the constellation of scorpio
this is the scorpion and you can just
see its
tentacles represented by the stick
diagram
there where his body is partly below the
horizon
the bright star in the center of uh
scorpio there is another of these
red stars a very prominent one this one
antares
i'm going to zoom in on it this is a
red super giant star it's many times
brighter than arcturus in terms of its
power output
but it's about 10 times as far away so
it looks equivalently bright to our eye
and we always have to remember that just
because something is bright it doesn't
necessarily mean it's powerful it might
be a nearby star
so that's antares the bright star in the
constellation of scorpio
so we're now going to let the sky
properly darken and run time forward to
11 o'clock in the evening
as we do that scorpio will move and
disappear there the sky is darkened
already
it will disappear down below the rise
and that was the international space
station just whizzing across
doing a a very low pass in the south but
slightly to the
west of south we have the moon here and
it's
nearly a showing full this planetarium
show is set for the 1st of august
but obviously as the month goes on the
moon will pass through
full and then into the later parts of
the sky and in the morning sky
uh becoming uh a half and a crescent
again
over about the next 16 days so that was
the moon and
next to it there are a couple of very
bright objects there
and of course we can also see the milky
way milky way runs through this
constellation
of sagittarius and uh just above the
horizon
now the stick diagram i always say this
makes it look more like a teapot to me
you can see that teapot shape but the
ancient people made
out an archer of a half man half
horse centur which is a very
interesting way of putting the stars
together i can't really see that one
myself
but lurking within this region is the
thick star clouds of the milky way and
lots of interesting objects this is the
eagle nebula
with the familiar pillars of creation
deep in the center there
where new stars are being formed out of
the collapsing clouds of gas and dust
this was famously photographed by the
hubble space telescope
it's one of its iconic images just below
that we have the swan
nebula the very bright part is is its
wing
and then you can see that sort of s
shape over going to the left and then
up where its head and its beak are
supposed to be
this is another star-forming region
where clouds of gas
are giving birth to new stars and star
clusters
yet another one a little bit more
evolved this time this is the lagoon
nebula
and you can see the star cluster has
formed
and there's beginning to blow a bubble
around itself and blow the
rest of the material outwards away from
the center
and that stops any more stars forming
once it reaches a certain point
here we have just next door the trifid
nebula where we have
again the red color of hydrogen gas and
some dark dust lanes and a new star
cluster emerging
from its nebula and also the blue color
there
is the very strong blue
light bouncing back from a cloud of gas
behind where one of the very hot young
blue stars is
reflecting its light back to us so we'll
pull back away from
the star clouds of sagittarius a bit and
get the wide view and then we're going
to have a look at some planets
they're just on the screen at the left
there we're going to
take a look at the uh planet jupiter
first
just above the moon on the 1st of august
because the moon will move from night to
night
so as we zoom into jupiter we see the
disc of the planet with the familiar
cloud belts
that's what you'll see with a rather
small telescope
and of course we've got three of its
large moons out to the right there
europa ganymede and callisto you'll see
those easily even with binoculars
they're really quite bright but with a
more powerful telescope we can zoom in
even further and we'll zoom right in on
the planet itself
now we can clearly see the cloud belts
and the great red spot that
giant hurricane that's been raging for
over 400 years
first seen by galileo and lots of
smaller spots which are smaller storms
a little object out to the right there
the red one is uh
one of jupiter's small moons amalfia
and what we're going to do now is let
time click forward
and you'll see the planet spin on its
axis
it only takes about 10 or 11 hours to
rotate around
despite being so large that a thousand
earths would fit inside jupiter so there
we can
run time forwards and the great red spot
moves across
over to the left there the moon io that
was hiding behind jupiter has appeared
and europa is now about to go into
eclipse
so when we started we had io hiding in
the eclipse
here it is it's now come out of the
shadow of jupiter
and when we zoom right in on io you'll
see
the amazing colors of the landscape the
yellows oranges
whites and blacks those are all the
colors of sulfur
because io is the most volcanic world we
know
it's completely covered in those black
dots are all volcanoes
spewing sulfur across the surface it's
turning itself
inside out now we have pulled back a
little bit and going to have a look at
europa the second moon just before it
disappears into eclipse
so we'll uh zoom right in on europa and
what we see here is an icy world covered
in a layer of ice
with some cracks and grooves running
across it
and those cracks and grooves seem to be
bringing
darker material to the surface we think
there's an
underneath the ice ocean about 100
kilometers deep
and more water liquid water in that
ocean than there are in
all the oceans of the earth
here's the third moon of jupiter called
ganymede and this is the largest moon in
the solar system
bigger even than the planet mercury
covered in ice and a few craters
quite a mixed terrain we think this too
may have
an icy ocean underneath and these icy
oceans are quite strong candidates for
harboring extraterrestrial life perhaps
simple
organisms living in the water kept warm
by volcanic
processes or perhaps more complex
creatures
we need to go and explore now we're
looking at callisto
and callisto's covered in craters with a
much darker surface
and orbits further away from jupiter and
doesn't seem to have
that liquid ocean inside it seems to be
all frozen up
if you want to hear more about those
look for my talk fire and ice
on youtube because that covers a lot of
detail about the moons
so that was jupiter just up and to the
left we have
the planet saturn we'll go and have a
look at that now as it's so close
so we zoom in on saturn and you'll begin
to see the
rings this is what a small telescope
would show the body of the planet
and the rings and perhaps even that dark
gap
between the a and the b ring also you'll
see a family of moons
titan dione ria tethys
e apetus it's easy to find about five of
the moons
with a moderate sized telescope the
larger the scope is the
more moons you'll be able to track down
because they range in brightness
if we zoom right in you'll see the
gorgeous disk of the planet
more subtle colours than jupiter but
nevertheless quite a lot of cloud belts
you'll see the shadow of the planet on
the rings there
and you'll also see more detail about
the cassini division as it's called the
gap in the rings
largest moon of saturn is titan and a
fascinating world it is in its own right
it has a thick atmosphere that we can't
see through
with ordinary telescopes but we have
looked through that a little bit with
infrared
and with radar from the orbiter cassini
mission when that was still active and
indeed dropped a probe called huygens
down onto the surface
and revealed that it has weather and
rain and frost
and lakes but these lakes are all made
of liquid methane because it's so cold
that far out in the solar system
all the water is frozen up
so now let's go and look at perhaps the
most famous constellation in the
northern sky
and that's the great bear ursa major it
comprises the plow
feature the big dipper plus the other
bits which represent the head and paws
of the bear
so there is the great bear
rather low in the north at this time uh
we're
early hours of the morning at the moment
about 2 a.m
and uh it's quite low in the north so
it's not the best
time to be looking for it but it's
always worth
checking it out in the tail the middle
star in the tail
of the great bear you can even with the
naked eye see is a double star
two components mizar and alcor there but
with a
telescope we can zoom right in all the
way in on my
uh here and mizar reveals itself to be
two separate components we could also do
that with
alcor and we would find that too would
be a double star so this is a pair of
double stars a quadruple star system
that's the middle star in the tail of
the great bear
and we can use that as a signpost
because if we just go up and left a bit
we find the pinwheel galaxy messier's
object number 101 in his catalogue
lovely spiral arms and the deep yellow
color of the nucleus showing there
very easy object to find with a small
telescope here's the hubble space
telescope view
the very detailed the image
showing those slightly irregular spiral
arms
so we'll zoom back away from that
and now we're going to drop down just
below the tail of the grate there
there's mizar and alcor again so we're
just going to go
almost the same distance but down to the
lower side of the tail just here
we're going to zoom in on what looks
like a star but it turns out to be
the whirlpool galaxy and the bright
nucleus
of its smaller companion galaxy that
it's currently
consuming it's gobbling it up with its
gravity
and i love the colors in this image of
the whirlpool galaxy they blew
this hot uh young stars that have
recently been formed in the spiral arms
also over in the great bear we have a
different type of object we're going to
slew across to the right here and look
just below
the center of the bowl of the great bear
bowl of the plow and here we have the
owl nebula because it looks rather like
the eyes and beak of an owl through a
small telescope
but here we see it's an expanding smoke
ring of
uh gas and dust that has been shed from
the outer layers of a dying star
our sun will form one of these
structures called a planetary nebula
there's nothing to do with planets they
just looked a bit like planets
with ancient telescopes and just next
door to the owl nebula we have another
galaxy this is a spiral but it's almost
edge on to us and around 45 million
light years away
so four times further away than the
other two galaxies that we've looked at
so
far that are fairly nearby at 10 million
this is 45 million
pull back away from those objects and
we'll go up
above the bowl of the big dipper
and find another pair of galaxies that
are also quite close by
around about 10 or 11 million light
years
in fact you can see three galaxies here
there's a small one to the left
big one in the middle and one at the top
the large one in the center is bodes
galaxy
and it's the main one of a small cluster
of galaxies
just above it is the cigar galaxy and
the cigar galaxy is
would you believe it's a spiral galaxy
but about six million years ago
it had a near miss with its larger
neighbor and it's disrupted it
twisted it and caused a huge outburst
of material shooting out from the
central region there
that red hydrogen gas color again
lots of new stars being formed in the
cigar galaxy as a result of all that
turmoil
so now we've looked at the great bear
we'll look at the little bear
ursa miner this is just above it
and uh here's the stick diagram showing
a similar sort of
plow like structure
there's the little bear and there's a
very long tail these bears definitely
aren't anatomically correct
bears have rather short tails and these
bears have very long ones
but the tip of the tail of
uh that's a minor is very important to
us astronomers
and to navigate us it's the pole star
polaris the north star
sits directly in line with the spin axis
of the earth
so it seems to stay still as we turn
around it
and always indicates north
i'll illustrate that because what we can
do is run time
forwards and as it does so the sky
rotates you also see one or two
satellites
rudely zipping across our field of view
this is uh
when they're in polar orbits they quite
often pass by polaris
for obvious reasons this being the north
pole of the sky
so we're rotating around the polaris
stays still
everything else spins around it now
we're going to run time back so that i
uh
put time back to where it was at around
2 30 in the morning and
again the satellites are now moving
backwards this stellarium software knows
all about things like the international
space station and when you're going to
be able to see it
and it's very very useful for planning
observing times and sessions you can set
the date and the time and see
exactly what the sky is going to look
like
right so we'll now move on and we'll
move away from
ursa minor and ursa major and have a
look at some of the other constellations
that are very prominent at this time of
year
so i'll just zoom back out and then go
and find the next
target which is the constellation of
hercules the hero
very recognizable because these four
stars in the center of the screen
make up this keystone shape and then
hercules arms and legs stick out
from the four corners of the keystone
he's upside down
as the graphic illustrates and fighting
with a multi-headed snake the hydra
but um we'll take that away and we'll
zoom in on perhaps my favorite object in
this part of the sky
two-thirds of the way between the
right-hand stars of a keystone
just in here there's a little object
that easily found with binoculars
but the telescope reveals it better it's
the great globular cluster in hercules
it's about half a million stars packed
tightly together
in a little tiny ball of stars about a
light year across
but just outside our galaxy the milky
way galaxy has about 400 of these
so-called globular clusters orbiting
around it
here's another one this is uh just a
little bit further
um north in the sky than uh the first
one
26 700 light years away just outside the
disk of the milky way
a bit smaller there's a high resolution
telescope view of it from hubble
very nice objects to look at with the
telescope because
uh they sit nicely against the blackness
of their surroundings
um very lovely objects to look at they
look like a jewels
diamonds scattered on a velvet sky
next door to hercules we have the next
constellation it's called
lyra named after a greek musical
instrument
it's a parallelogram of stars next to
one bright star called vega
and uh they managed to make this in
their imagination into this particular
musical instrument
i find that a little bit of a stretch
but that's true for a lot of the
constellations actually
there's a lot of imagination used
so if you have a look and zoom in on
vega it's a very bright star
in our northern sky but this is one
that's bright because it's fairly nearby
it's only 25 light years away which
makes it one of the sun's near neighbors
it is hotter and brighter than the sun
um about 9 000 degrees our sun is
5 800. and so vega is putting out about
40 times as much
light but it's also quite close to us
so that's the star vega in the corner of
uh
lyra now we're going to look down
between the stars at the foot of lyra
and we find the ring nebula again a
lovely object to look at if you've got a
reasonable telescope this is another of
these so-called planetary nebulae formed
by a dying star
and you can see the dead nuclear core
the white dot in the center there that's
called a white dwarf star it's the
remains
of the core of the star that's puffed
off its outer layers
these planetary nebulae are some of the
most beautiful objects
to look at in the sky
we've moved over to the constellation of
cygnus the swan here
just about see the wings stretched out
like
a left and right and the beak of the
swan heading down towards the bottom
so this one really does actually make
quite a good swan
shape it lies almost along the
line of the milky way the band of the
milky way passes along the neck of
cygnus the swan so there's lots of
interesting objects in this area
and one of my favorites which you need a
medium-sized telescope to find
and ideally a special filter called an
oxygen filter
to reveal the fine structure of this
expanding shock wave called the veil
nebula
this is where a supernova happens
several thousand years ago the star blew
up
and destroyed itself probably collapsing
to a neutron star or black hole even
and has then got these remains of the
outer layers
traveling away as a shockwave through
space
in the neck of the swan this is uh a
wolf
rayet star sat in the middle of its
nebula called the crescent nebula
this star has shed all its outer layers
out into this crescent and um and
exposed the still active and um
very very hot core of the star that's
almost entirely composed of helium
it's so big and powerful it's forced all
of the outer layers of hydrogen away
from itself
it would have been a hundred times the
mass of our sun and one of the most
powerful stars in the sky
but these big hyper giants as they're
called don't live very long
it won't be long before it explodes as a
very powerful supernova
just above it at the tail of the swan
next to the bright blue star deneb that
you can see there
is the north america nebula and for once
it's the right way up you can see where
the dark is the
gulf of mexico there with the peninsula
of central america coming down
and the peninsula of florida wrapping
around really does look like the shape
of
the northern part of the united states
and a bit of canada
down into central america there
that's very large object you don't need
a telescope for that we didn't have to
zoom in very far at all and actually
it's a good
good object if you just have a camera
you can take a picture of this
with a wide field lens like a 50
millimeter lens
it really doesn't need a great big long
focal length
down at the other end of cygnus we have
albirio which is a pair of stars
that show fantastically well through a
telescope the colors of them
the bright one is orange and it's
contrasted by its little neighbor which
is a bright blue
star a very very hot star indeed
and they well worth looking at just
below
the beak of the swan we find this
strange arrangement of stars which looks
like a coat hanger upside down
these stars have nothing whatever to do
with each other in space they're just a
pure
chance alignment in the sky that gives
us the impression
of a familiar household object but
they're all at different distances so
it's just a perspective effect next to
that we have
another of these dying star remnants the
dumbbell nebula
right in the center the dead white dwarf
star
and the material has been shed and shot
out creating this dumbbell effect as a
jet of material is
zooming off north and south of the spin
axes
of the central star and whirling around
very very nice object to look at with a
medium-sized telescope
lots of targets in cygnus well worth
exploring
so now we're going to pull back and then
move on a little bit further into the
night
and i must mention that on the 11th and
12th of
august and the night's there but after
midnight we will find
a lot of meteors from the perseid meteor
shower
so if you are observing don't be
surprised if you see some shooting stars
coming over from the eastern side of the
sky
and well worth it is one of the best
meteor showers
of the whole year they're really only
two good ones
this one on the 11th and 12th of august
and
the leonids that are in november
we've moved on to the early hours now
and here is
mars the red planet
mars is going to be great targets later
in the year
but so it's beginning to become more
prominent in the sky now
here it is with its two moons demos and
phobos they
stand for fear and panic they uh
mars being the god of war seems
appropriate
um it's quite small planet so be
somewhat disappointing unless you've got
a very powerful telescope but here we
can zoom right in and see the red
deserts
and some of the darker markings and
really it's quite difficult to see any
detail on the surface of mars
often you need to use the right filters
try and bring the color out
and color contrast in particular
otherwise all you see is a bright red
dot a bit like that there
certainly photographing it is difficult
as well even with a powerful telescope
like the one i have in my observatory
but i have managed to get some
reasonable images
just next door we have the planet uranus
green disk this is what it looks like
through my telescope it's so far away i
can't see very much detail on it
but i can track down uh five of its
moons
ariel umbrial oberon titania and miranda
there are other little ones like puck
and julia that are marked there
but they're very very faint indeed the
four or five
is pretty much the limit for for an
amateur telescope
but it's worth tracking down just to see
another planet
and add it to your collection and you'll
see it's a greenish white
color to it and
this is a high resolution zoomed in
image here
revealing that it too has rings but
again they're very very thin
and not observable with amateur
telescopes
so we'll pull back away from uranus
and take a look at our final object
on the sky tour tonight which is
over here this is the planet venus the
morning star at the moment it's in the
twilight as you can see there
but very very bright indeed in the
pre-dawn sky and if we zoom in with
binoculars or a powerful telescope we'll
see that it reveals a phase
rather like the moon does with the lit
side facing down
which are the direction where the sun is
going to rise from
and obviously the night side opposite
there so around about half
phase during this part of the month
it alternates between being visible in
the morning sky
which it will be for some time to come
and the evening sky where it was
earlier in the year april and may were
very good time for seeing it then
we'll pull back and we don't have time
to look at anything else
on this show tonight but i just will
mention as we pull back away from venus
all the way back out to the widest
possible view
that we'll see here we go
pulling back now just coming into the
screenshot on the left
there in the orange there there's
mercury
we'll look at that later because it's
still far too far into the twilight
i'll try and catch it next month but now
that's the end of the show
and we're going to let time run forward
and the sun will rise up above the
horizon and of course
the stars will fade so i hope you've
enjoyed that whistle stop tour of the
night sky
in 30 minutes from sunset all the way to
sunrise
and still see venus even shining
brightly now look
so there we go
thank you very much indeed for watching
i hope you've enjoyed that and do check
out my other videos that
are on youtube there's something like 50
of them now
all on different subjects to do with
astronomy